<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-GB" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-4-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Venice. A court of justice.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</b>, the Magnificoes, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salerio</b>, and others</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">What, is Antonio here?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Ready, so please your grace.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am sorry for thee: thou art come to answer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch</span>
									<br/>
									<span>uncapable of pity, void and empty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From any dram of mercy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have heard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your grace hath ta’en great pains to qualify</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that no lawful means can carry me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out of his envy’s reach, I do oppose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My patience to his fury, and am arm’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To suffer, with a quietness of spirit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The very tyranny and rage of his.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Go one, and call the Jew into the court.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salerio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">He is ready at the door: he comes, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</b></i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Make room, and let him stand before our face.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou but lead’st this fashion of thy malice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the last hour of act; and then ’tis thought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou’lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And where thou now exact’st the penalty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is a pound of this poor merchant’s flesh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, touch’d with human gentleness and love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forgive a moiety of the principal;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Glancing an eye of pity on his losses,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That have of late so huddled on his back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enow to press a royal merchant down</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pluck commiseration of his state</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From stubborn Turks and Tartars, never train’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To offices of tender courtesy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have possess’d your grace of what I purpose;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have the due and forfeit of my bond:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you deny it, let the danger light</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon your charter and your city’s freedom.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You’ll ask me, why I rather choose to have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A weight of carrion flesh than to receive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Three thousand ducats: I’ll not answer that:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, say, it is my humour: is it answer’d?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What if my house be troubled with a rat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have it baned? What, are you answer’d yet?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some men there are love not a gaping pig;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some, that are mad if they behold a cat;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And others, when the bagpipe sings i’ the nose,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot contain their urine: for affection,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As there is no firm reason to be render’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why he cannot abide a gaping pig;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why he, a harmless necessary cat;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why he, a woollen bagpipe; but of force</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must yield to such inevitable shame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As to offend, himself being offended;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So can I give no reason, nor I will not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than a lodged hate and a certain loathing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I bear Antonio, that I follow thus</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A losing suit against him. Are you answer’d?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This is no answer, thou unfeeling man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To excuse the current of thy cruelty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">I am not bound to please thee with my answers.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Do all men kill the things they do not love?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Hates any man the thing he would not kill?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Every offence is not a hate at first.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I pray you, think you question with the Jew:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may as well go stand upon the beach</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bid the main flood bate his usual height;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may as well use question with the wolf</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may as well forbid the mountain pines</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wag their high tops and to make no noise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may as well do anything most hard,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As seek to soften that⁠—than which what’s harder?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His Jewish heart: therefore, I do beseech you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make no more offers, use no farther means,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But with all brief and plain conveniency</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me have judgment and the Jew his will.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">For thy three thousand ducats here is six.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What judgment shall I dread, doing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were in six parts and every part a ducat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not draw them; I would have my bond.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">How shalt thou hope for mercy, rendering none?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have among you many a purchased slave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, like your asses and your dogs and mules,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You use in abject and in slavish parts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because you bought them: shall I say to you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let them be free, marry them to your heirs?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why sweat they under burthens? let their beds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be made as soft as yours and let their palates</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be season’d with such viands? You will answer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“The slaves are ours:” so do I answer you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pound of flesh, which I demand of him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is dearly bought; ’tis mine and I will have it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you deny me, fie upon your law!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is no force in the decrees of Venice.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I stand for judgment: answer; shall I have it?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Upon my power I may dismiss this court,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless Bellario, a learned doctor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom I have sent for to determine this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come here to-day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salerio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, here stays without</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A messenger with letters from the doctor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>New come from Padua.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Bring us the letter; call the messenger.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones and all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am a tainted wether of the flock,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meetest for death: the weakest kind of fruit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Drops earliest to the ground; and so let me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You cannot better be employ’d, Bassanio,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than to live still and write mine epitaph.</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nerissa</b>, dressed like a lawyer’s clerk</i>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Came you from Padua, from Bellario?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nerissa</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">From both, my lord. Bellario greets your grace.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Presenting a letter</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not on thy sole, but on thy soul, harsh Jew,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou makest thy knife keen; but no metal can,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, not the hangman’s axe, bear half the keenness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, be thou damn’d, inexecrable dog!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for thy life let justice be accused.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou almost makest me waver in my faith</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hold opinion with Pythagoras,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That souls of animals infuse themselves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into the trunks of men: thy currish spirit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Govern’d a wolf, who, hang’d for human slaughter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, whilst thou lay’st in thy unhallow’d dam,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Infused itself in thee; for thy desires</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are wolvish, bloody, starved and ravenous.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou but offend’st thy lungs to speak so loud:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This letter from Bellario doth commend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A young and learned doctor to our court.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is he?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nerissa</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He attendeth here hard by,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To know your answer, whether you’ll admit him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>With all my heart. Some three or four of you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go give him courteous conduct to this place.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Meantime the court shall hear Bellario’s letter.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Clerk</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Reads]</i>
									<br/>
									<span>Your grace shall understand that at the receipt of</span>
									<br/>
									<span>your letter I am very sick: but in the instant that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>your messenger came, in loving visitation was with</span>
									<br/>
									<span>me a young doctor of Rome; his name is Balthasar. I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>acquainted him with the cause in controversy between</span>
									<br/>
									<span>the Jew and Antonio the merchant: we turned o’er</span>
									<br/>
									<span>many books together: he is furnished with my</span>
									<br/>
									<span>opinion; which, bettered with his own learning, the</span>
									<br/>
									<span>greatness whereof I cannot enough commend, comes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>with him, at my importunity, to fill up your grace’s</span>
									<br/>
									<span>request in my stead. I beseech you, let his lack of</span>
									<br/>
									<span>years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>estimation; for I never knew so young a body with so</span>
									<br/>
									<span>old a head. I leave him to your gracious</span>
									<br/>
									<span>acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his</span>
									<br/>
									<span>commendation.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You hear the learn’d Bellario, what he writes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here, I take it, is the doctor come.</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</b>, dressed like a doctor of laws</i>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me your hand. Come you from old Bellario?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">I did, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You are welcome: take your place.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are you acquainted with the difference</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That holds this present question in the court?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am informed thoroughly of the cause.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is the merchant here, and which the Jew?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Is your name Shylock?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Shylock is my name.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Of a strange nature is the suit you follow;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet in such rule that the Venetian law</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You stand within his danger, do you not?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Ay, so he says.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Do you confess the bond?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">I do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Then must the Jew be merciful.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">On what compulsion must I? tell me that.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The quality of mercy is not strain’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the place beneath: it is twice blest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It blesseth him that gives and him that takes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis mightiest in the mightiest: it becomes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The throned monarch better than his crown;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His sceptre shows the force of temporal power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The attribute to awe and majesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But mercy is above this sceptred sway;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is enthroned in the hearts of kings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is an attribute to God himself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And earthly power doth then show likest God’s</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though justice be thy plea, consider this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, in the course of justice, none of us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that same prayer doth teach us all to render</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To mitigate the justice of thy plea;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must needs give sentence ’gainst the merchant there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My deeds upon my head! I crave the law,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The penalty and forfeit of my bond.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Is he not able to discharge the money?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, here I tender it for him in the court;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yea, twice the sum: if that will not suffice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will be bound to pay it ten times o’er,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If this will not suffice, it must appear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That malice bears down truth. And I beseech you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wrest once the law to your authority:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do a great right, do a little wrong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And curb this cruel devil of his will.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It must not be; there is no power in Venice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can alter a decree established:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twill be recorded for a precedent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And many an error by the same example</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will rush into the state: it cannot be.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A Daniel come to judgment! yea, a Daniel!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O wise young judge, how I do honour thee!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">I pray you, let me look upon the bond.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Here ’tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Shylock, there’s thrice thy money offer’d thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, not for Venice.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, this bond is forfeit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lawfully by this the Jew may claim</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nearest the merchant’s heart. Be merciful:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>When it is paid according to the tenor.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It doth appear you are a worthy judge;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You know the law, your exposition</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath been most sound: I charge you by the law,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proceed to judgment: by my soul I swear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is no power in the tongue of man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To alter me: I stay here on my bond.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Most heartily I do beseech the court</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give the judgment.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why then, thus it is:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You must prepare your bosom for his knife.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">O noble judge! O excellent young man!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For the intent and purpose of the law</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath full relation to the penalty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which here appeareth due upon the bond.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis very true: O wise and upright judge!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How much more elder art thou than thy looks!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Therefore lay bare your bosom.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, his breast:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So says the bond: doth it not, noble judge?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Nearest his heart:” those are the very words.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is so. Are there balance here to weigh</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The flesh?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">I have them ready.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Is it so nominated in the bond?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is not so express’d: but what of that?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twere good you do so much for charity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">I cannot find it; ’tis not in the bond.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">You, merchant, have you any thing to say?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But little: I am arm’d and well prepared.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me your hand, Bassanio: fare you well!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grieve not that I am fallen to this for you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For herein Fortune shows herself more kind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than is her custom: it is still her use</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To let the wretched man outlive his wealth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An age of poverty; from which lingering penance</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of such misery doth she cut me off.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend me to your honourable wife:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell her the process of Antonio’s end;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say how I loved you, speak me fair in death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, when the tale is told, bid her be judge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether Bassanio had not once a love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Repent but you that you shall lose your friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he repents not that he pays your debt;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll pay it presently with all my heart.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Antonio, I am married to a wife</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is as dear to me as life itself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But life itself, my wife, and all the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are not with me esteem’d above thy life:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here to this devil, to deliver you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your wife would give you little thanks for that,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If she were by, to hear you make the offer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have a wife, whom, I protest, I love:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would she were in heaven, so she could</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nerissa</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis well you offer it behind her back;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wish would make else an unquiet house.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>These be the Christian husbands. I have a daughter;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would any of the stock of Barrabas</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had been her husband rather than a Christian!</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside</i>
									<br/>
									<span>We trifle time: I pray thee, pursue sentence.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A pound of that same merchant’s flesh is thine:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The court awards it, and the law doth give it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Most rightful judge!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And you must cut this flesh from off his breast:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The law allows it, and the court awards it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Most learned judge! A sentence! Come, prepare!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tarry a little; there is something else.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The words expressly are “a pound of flesh:”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, in the cutting it, if thou dost shed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are, by the laws of Venice, confiscate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto the state of Venice.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">O upright judge! Mark, Jew: O learned judge!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Is that the law?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thyself shalt see the act:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, as thou urgest justice, be assured</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt have justice, more than thou desirest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">O learned judge! Mark, Jew: a learned judge!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I take this offer, then; pay the bond thrice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let the Christian go.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Here is the money.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Soft!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Jew shall have all justice; soft! no haste:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He shall have nothing but the penalty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">O Jew! an upright judge, a learned judge!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But just a pound of flesh: if thou cut’st more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or less than a just pound, be it but so much</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As makes it light or heavy in the substance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or the division of the twentieth part</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of one poor scruple, nay, if the scale do turn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in the estimation of a hair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou diest and all thy goods are confiscate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A second Daniel, a Daniel, Jew!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Why doth the Jew pause? take thy forfeiture.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Give me my principal, and let me go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">I have it ready for thee; here it is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He hath refused it in the open court:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He shall have merely justice and his bond.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A Daniel, still say I, a second Daniel!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Shall I not have barely my principal?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, then the devil give him good of it!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll stay no longer question.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tarry, Jew:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The law hath yet another hold on you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is enacted in the laws of Venice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If it be proved against an alien</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That by direct or indirect attempts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He seek the life of any citizen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The party ’gainst the which he doth contrive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall seize one half his goods; the other half</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comes to the privy coffer of the state;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the offender’s life lies in the mercy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the duke only, ’gainst all other voice.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In which predicament, I say, thou stand’st;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For it appears, by manifest proceeding,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That indirectly and directly too</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast contrived against the very life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the defendant; and thou hast incurr’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The danger formerly by me rehearsed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Down therefore and beg mercy of the duke.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast not left the value of a cord;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore thou must be hang’d at the state’s charge.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That thou shalt see the difference of our spirits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For half thy wealth, it is Antonio’s;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other half comes to the general state,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Ay, for the state, not for Antonio.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, take my life and all; pardon not that:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You take my house when you do take the prop</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That doth sustain my house; you take my life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When you do take the means whereby I live.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">What mercy can you render him, Antonio?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">A halter gratis; nothing else, for God’s sake.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So please my lord the duke and all the court</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To quit the fine for one half of his goods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am content; so he will let me have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other half in use, to render it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon his death, unto the gentleman</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That lately stole his daughter:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two things provided more, that, for this favour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He presently become a Christian;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other, that he do record a gift,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here in the court, of all he dies possess’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He shall do this, or else I do recant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pardon that I late pronounced here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Art thou contented, Jew? what dost thou say?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">I am content.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Clerk, draw a deed of gift.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I pray you, give me leave to go from hence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not well: send the deed after me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will sign it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Get thee gone, but do it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In christening shalt thou have two god-fathers:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bring thee to the gallows, not the font.</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Shylock</b></i>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I humbly do desire your grace of pardon:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must away this night toward Padua,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And it is meet I presently set forth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Antonio, gratify this gentleman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, in my mind, you are much bound to him.</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke</b> and his train</i>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of grievous penalties; in lieu whereof,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Three thousand ducats, due unto the Jew,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We freely cope your courteous pains withal.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And stand indebted, over and above,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In love and service to you evermore.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He is well paid that is well satisfied;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I, delivering you, am satisfied</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therein do account myself well paid:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mind was never yet more mercenary.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I pray you, know me when we meet again:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I wish you well, and so I take my leave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take some remembrance of us, as a tribute,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not as a fee: grant me two things, I pray you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not to deny me, and to pardon me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You press me far, and therefore I will yield.</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</b></i>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me your gloves, I’ll wear them for your sake;</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</b></i>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for your love, I’ll take this ring from you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do not draw back your hand; I’ll take no more;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you in love shall not deny me this.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This ring, good sir, alas, it is a trifle!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not shame myself to give you this.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will have nothing else but only this;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now methinks I have a mind to it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There’s more depends on this than on the value.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And find it out by proclamation:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Only for this, I pray you, pardon me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I see, sir, you are liberal in offers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You taught me first to beg; and now methinks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You teach me how a beggar should be answer’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when she put it on, she made me vow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That ’scuse serves many men to save their gifts.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An if your wife be not a mad-woman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And know how well I have deserved the ring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She would not hold out enemy for ever,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you!</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nerissa</b></i>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antonio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let his deservings and my love withal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be valued against your wife’s commandment.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bassanio</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give him the ring, and bring him, if thou canst,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto Antonio’s house: away! make haste.</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</b></i>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, you and I will thither presently;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the morning early will we both</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fly toward Belmont: come, Antonio.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same. A street.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nerissa</b></i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Inquire the Jew’s house out, give him this deed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let him sign it: we’ll away to-night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And be a day before our husbands home:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</b></i>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fair sir, you are well o’erta’en</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Lord Bassanio upon more advice</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your company at dinner.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That cannot be:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His ring I do accept most thankfully:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so, I pray you, tell him: furthermore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I pray you, show my youth old Shylock’s house.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gratiano</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">That will I do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nerissa</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, I would speak with you.</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</b></i>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll see if I can get my husband’s ring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Portia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">[Aside to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nerissa</b>]</i> Thou mayst, I warrant.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We shall have old swearing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That they did give the rings away to men;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But we’ll outface them, and outswear them too.</span>
									<br/>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aloud</i>
									<br/>
									<span>Away! make haste: thou knowist where I will tarry.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nerissa</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">Come, good sir, will you show me to this house?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
